start

Study Guide
 
CALL TO PRAYER
·      Azan - the Islamic call to worship. Recited by the Muezzin from a mosque at 5 prescribed times per day. In modern times, loudspeakers have been installed on minarets for this purpose.
·      Muezzin - male person appointed by mosque to recite the call to prayer for every worship event. The local community depends on him for accurate prayer schedule. Recites the azan atop minarets so everyone can hear.
·      Imam - worship leader of a mosque and head of a Muslim community. All mosques have an imam, and they are always male.
·      Mosque - a Muslim place of worship. Usually has one or more minarets and decorated with Qu’ran texts.
·      Minaret - a tall slender tower, typically part of a mosque, with a balcony from which a muezzin calls Muslims to prayer.
·      Kalimah - the content of the azan, consists of religious statements
·      Haram - forbidden by islamic law
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 


PANPIPE
·      Siku - traditional Andean Panpipe. Each community that used siku developed its own playing style and unique physical siku makeup due to complicated regional geography. Today the siku has been standardized to fit in with modern western forms of music.
·      Andes - expansive mountain chain through South America. One of the highest regions inhabited by humans, and the place from which the panpipe originated.
·      Altiplano - “high plane” region of the Andes. Farmland where people raise livestock as they have for thousands of years.
·      Hocket - rhythmic linear technique of alternating notes. Used by panpipe duos to create melodies where one player has a rest and the other has a note. originally thought to be used in andes because people needed to catch their breath.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 




SENEGAL
·      Negritude - a literary philosophy developed by francophone African intellectuals in France during 1930s. Central concepts disfavored French imperialism and called for a common racial identity across blacks worldwide.
·      Virtuoso - a person with outstanding abilities in a particular field. Particularly in the fine arts, describes a person with incredible technical skill and performance execution.  For example, Itzhak Perlman
·      Sabar - single headed drum played with one hand and one stick. Played by Wolof Griot caste of Senegal. Sabar can refer to the drum, the dance, or the event.
·      Caste - hereditary class in a given social system that determines social status and role. For example, social stratification in Senegal states that only people born into the Wolof griot caste can play sabar.
·      Griot - oral historian/musician in formerly casted West African socieities. For the Wolof ethnicity, only the griot play the Sabar.
·      Wolof - dominant ethnic group of Senegal. 90% of Senegal speaks Wolof language.
·      Rythme - a particular dance rhythm. Usually a fairly short unit that is played repeatedly, such as Kaolak.
·      Bakk - musical phrase. Usually longer than a rhythm, and can be derived from spoken word or created purely as a composition.
·      Kaolack - a popular rhythme. Drums play a polyrythmic, 12/8 or 4/4 feel. Also a region in Senegal where this rhythme originated from.
·      Mbalax -most important accompaniment played on mbeng mbeng. Now an umbrella term for Senegalese popular music with strong sabar influence.
·      drum language - Senegalese drummers often recite improvised texts while playing, considering the texts to reflect the rhythms’ meanings. Sounds are not tonal, but follow grammatical patterns that are universally recognized by players.
·      gin, pin, pax - the basic hand strokes for sabar drumming. Gin is a full stroke, pin is a rim slap, and pax is a muted sound where you hold the hand down on contact.
 
 


NORTH INDIA
·      Tabla - the primary type of drums in North Indian classical ensembles. Tabla consist of a paired set and are played with the hands: the tabla, the right hand drum, is the smaller of the two and tuned to a specific pitch. The baya, the left hand drum, is the larger of the two and indeterminate in pitch.
·      Hindustani music - north indian style of classical music
·      Hindu period - 200 - 1300, period of great enlightenment from dark ages
·      Medieval period - period of indian civilization following hindu period. 1300-1750, islamic invasion
·      Natyasastra - the indian treatise on the performing arts, defining treatise of indian classical music, written during 200Bc and 200
·      tal - a repeated rhythmic pattern or cycle that underlies the music, something that is usually played against, played by tabla
·      rhythmic Jatis - each tal can incorporate one of five jatis. they are different compositions of the bols. 
·      theka - accompaniment pattern played on tabla drum for tals, 
·      tintal - one of the most famous tals, 16 beats divided into 4 groups of 4
·      bols - a spoken syllable representing the different sounds that compose the drum language. for example ta is a bol. so is ka.
·      sam - first beat of the cycle of a tal, point of resolution, improvisations may begin anywhere in the cycle, but always resolve on the sam
·      rag - grouping of different pitches and intervals that move in characteristic patterns, a melodic type
·      SA RE GA PA MA DHA NI - like solfege, each stands for a note in the indian scale. The tone is not associated with pitch
·      ten thats - mode on which raga is based. it’s like a key
·      drone - single note played throughout piece. usually played by tanpura
·      sarod - a stringed instrument. Played with coconut shell. Finger nails control quality and timbre.
·      tanpura -  a long necked plucked string instrument. Droner
·      harmonium - an organ used in hindustani music. Sounds is generated thorugh pumping
·      guru - a master teacher. they have great skill. indian music is a virtuosic tradition in which virtuosos played in royal courts to please a king. in this system was only heard by the privileged few and the gurus who performed it. 
·      alap - opening section of a raga(conversation), notes of raga introduced one by one
·      jor - 2nd section of a raga, brings in fixed rhythm of tal
·      jhala - third final section, tempo increases greatly

start
OTHER
·      Bluegrass - American roots music. One instrument at a time improvises around a base melody, while others accompany.
·      Country - ballads/dance tunes w simple melodies and chord progressions. Associated from the white working class.
·      Punk - 70s originated, rooted in garagerock. Based on rejection of mainstream. Anti-establishment lyrics. Harsh melodies and chords.
·      Hiphop - rhythmic music accompanying rapping. Originated in 70s in African American communities in the Bronx.
·      Suya- music of a Brazilian tribe. Emphasis on vocals, passed down orally.
·      Pygmy - short ethnic group from central africa
·      Mbuti -indiginous pygmy group in the Congo
·      Yodel - is a form of singing that involves singing an extended note which rapidly and repeatedly changes in pitch from the vocal or chest register (or "chest voice") to the falsetto/head register; making a high-low-high-low sound.
·      Tuva - north of Mongolia, subject to Russia. Buddhists. Nomadic. 300,000 pop.
·      Khoomii  - tuvan song tradition, distinctive vocal production; produced by use of harmonics, makes partials audible
·      The Village People - YMCA, go west
·      Ota Benga - Mbuti pygmy, put in zoo and became exhibit in Missouri, commited suicide
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Musical vocab from Shelemay’s Soundscapes
·      Organology - the study of musical instruments

·      Sachs Hornbostel - a classification of musical instruments, named after the scholars who invented it.
·      Idiophones - self sounding instruments, the material of which they are made is set into vibration
·      Chordophones - sound source is one or more vibrating strings going away from soundboard, ex. Lute, harp
·      sympathetic strings (as on sarod)- vibrate with the main melody, give unique, metallic tone
·      aerophones - instruments in which h an enclosed column of air vibrates to produce sound. Have an opening or mouthpiece through which the player blows air. for example, an accordion.
·      free reed aerophone - Free reeds have enclosed reeds through which air is pushed. By a bellows or breath. for example, a clarinet.
membranophones - an instrument characterized by a membrane (drumhead) stretched across an opening on one or both ends of the instrument. the membrane vibrates to make music.
·      Electrophones - instruments whose sound is produced or modified electronically.
 

·      music - sound organized in ways meaningful to people at a particular time and place, Closely related music cultures can also categorize the same sounds differently
·      silence - a relative concept, we never experience absolute silence, because even our bodily functions create a sonic backdrop to our existence.
·      Quality- the color of a sound, rising from acoustical properties of the harmonic series. Also called timbre
·      timbre/tone color - The distinctiveness of a particular voice or instrument, arising from acoustical properties of the harmonic series. Also called quality.
·      attack - onset of a sound
·      decay - the way in which a sound dies out
·      vibrato - a purposeful vibration of the tone
·      straight tone - no vibrato
·      falsetto- head voice, light high sound
·      pitch - the relative highness or lowness of a sound, determined by frequency
·      range - The overall compass of pitches from highest to lowest is called range
·      interval - distance between pitches
·      registers - an area within a range
·      key - a group of pitches, or scale upon which a musical composition is created. A key has a tonic or root note, and chords associated with subjective senses of tension, relief, and arrival. There are minor and major keys.
·      Scale - an arrangement of pitches linearly organized to be ascending or descending, often associated with a different key.
·      equal temperament - a system of tuning, in which every pair of adjacent pitches is separated by the same interval
·      "out of tune" - incorrect pitch. Can be relative. For example, the note A is meant to be at 440hz, but some institutions teach 442.
·      Microtone - interval smaller than a semitone. Used in microtonal music, or any music containing intervals that differ from the Western 12 tone equal temperament.
·      Pentatonic - a scale consisting of five notes per octave. Base scale of China and Mongolia. Contrast with heptatonic scale.
·      melody (ascending, descending, conjunct motion, disjunct motion) - organization of pitch into meaningful units.
o   Conjunct - close and regular intervals in a stepwise pattern
o   Disjunct - large intervals in irregular pattern
·      Phrase - many phrases make up a melody
 
·      Duration - the time element of music, in terms of pulse
·      Pulse - a short regular element of time that underlines beat
·      Rhythm - the temporal relationships within music
·      Tempo - music’s rate of speed
·      Accent - emphasis on a pitch, by increased intensity, altered range, or lengthened duration
·      Syncopation - a rhythmic effect that provides an unexpected accent, through changing the established pattern of expected stressed and unstressed beats
·      free rhythm - very flexible in rhythm, lacking rhythmic organization, no steady pulse
·      additive rhythm - coexistence of multiple rhythms layered on top of each other in same unit of time.
·      Clavé - a repeated underlying rhythmic pattern.
 
·      intensity - the loudness or softness of a sound, measured in decibels, determined by volume and dynamics.
 
·      Texture - the perceived relationship of simultaneous musical sounds
·      Monophony - solo
·      Biphony - two distinct lines, according to SS one drone and one melody above
·      Homophony - one melody supported by multiple parts, all move in same rhythm
·      Polyphony - many sounds and melodies
·      Heterophony - several voices that perform very similar, but slightly different melodies and rhythms at the same time.
 
·      Form - the shape or structure
·      strophic - structure that follows clearly delineated textual verses, or stroophes
·      verse/refrain - verses alternate with a recurring chorus, repeats both the same music and the same text
·      composition - creating music
·      improvisation - spontaneous creation during performance
 












 
GENERAL CONCEPTS
 
“World Music” - an idea that is culturally constructed; could be defined as “Different kinds of music that other people make in other parts of the world”
 
Who makes “world music”?
What does it sound like?
Where does “world music” happen?
When?
How - under what conditions?
 
We become invested in notions of world music as “authentic”
(Authenticity - true to its origins [unfooled around with])
        	Geographically isolated rather than mobile
        	Fixed rather than fluid
        	Traditional rather than contemporary
        	Of the folk rather than art traditions
        	Removed from commerce rather than commodified
        	Of minority peoples rather than dominant (the West and the rest)
 
Cultural geography - a subfield within human/behavioral geography (environment, regional geography, quantitative revolution) Concerns of cultural geography: the human element of spaces; linking culture to physical . Examines questions: How do people perceive places? How do we function spatially?
 
Culture - the sum total of ways of living built up by a group of human beings and transmitted from one generation to another (e.g., beliefs, customs, values; the invisible fabric that holds societies together). the knowledge needed for everyday life)
 
Anthropology - a discipline in the social science. Focuses on past and present human social and biological life including social interaction, language and physiology. Concentration on “primitive,” rural, non-literate people in developing nations until recently. Scientifically grounded in data collection, observation, analysis. Four subfields: physical anthropology, linguistic anthropology, archaeology, and cultural (AKA social) anthropology, what we’re concerned with.
Cultural anthropology has wide range of approaches, focuses on human social behavior. Fieldwork seems to be single connector across the discipline.
 
Ethnomusicology - anthropology’s musically-oriented stepchild (from Nettl)
Based largely on the intellectual foundation of anthropology, employs its specific vocabulary and methodology, yet has developed others as applicable to music.
Anthropology the study of culture, ethnomusicology the study of music in cultural context, music as an aspect of human social behavior. Music in and as culture.
In practicality, everything that isn’t “musicology:” (field develops after musicology)
Non-western music (folk music/“traditional music,” art music, pop)
“Ethnic” music at home, Native American, African American music (jazz, gospel). Music of immigrants, diaspora communities.
Field practiced mostly by Americans and Europeans, studying music of elsewhere, though that is slowly changing
Involves study of common people, not elites, “the folk,” what is typical of a culture”
Music in oral traditions - western music in the score; music as inseparable from performance, as a social activity between human beings
Living musical systems
An approach to musical study - Can do ethnographic study of anything, including an orchestra or conservatory.
 
Fieldwork - a research process that involves going to a research site - “the field” - for several months or even years. Involves developing skills in observation, participation, and interviews
 
Fieldnotes - written documentation of one’s fieldwork observations. Most fieldworkers keep a journal so that they can best recall various events.
 
Participant observation - sharing the experience of music making as a way to learn and contribute to the musical process.
 
Musical ethnography - research product of ethnomusicologists, and the description and interpretation of a musical culture through writing, film, or another medium. “writing about people (from the Greek ethnos: ‘folk,’ ‘people,’ and graphein: ‘write’)
 
Ethnocentrism - to judge another culture based on the values of one’s own.
 
A ‘text’ - a discursively constructed area that is shaped by wider social relations and representative of divisions and tensions in society. A discursive space in which we - people in a society - shape or construct meaning. Could be almost anything; a book like Catcher in the Rye or a piece of music like the Star Spangled Banner. Subjective, open to interpretation, not necessarily agreed upon.
 
Discourse - established mode(s) of how we talk/write/think about something; a pre-existing conversation about a topic. For example, use of technology is central in discourses about hip-hop.
 
Dialectics - A method of argument or exposition that systematically weighs contradictory facts or ideas with a view to the resolution of their real or apparent contradictions. [Sometimes to show contradictions are apparent]
 
Commodity - product of industry bought and sold (commodity opposite of necessity) An article of trade or commerce
 
Globalization - a “widening, deepening and speeding up of global interconnection,” a feeling that the world is smaller, that this leads to a homogenization of world’s cultures, but also new hybrid forms, resistance, reassertion of roots, and more subtle markers of musical difference.
 
Oral traditions (as opposed to written traditions) - those passed down from person to person
 
Endogeny - musical expressions emanate from within relatively unique social
landscapes, rather than interacting with outside flows, consuming and reproducing the products of others, or mimicking international sounds
 
Diaspora - a dispersion of people from their original homeland; the product of migration
 
Diffusion - how music spreads out, may be from a single or multiple points of origin
 
Syncretism - adoption, blending, and merging of different traditions
 
Popular music: Lawrence Grossberg - [the popular] cannot be defined by appealing to either an objective aesthetic standard (as if it were inherently different from art) nor an objective social standard (as if it were inherently determined by who makes it or for whim it is made). Rather it has to be seen as a sphere in which people struggle over reality and their place in it, a sphere in which people are continuously working with and within already existing relations of power, to make sense of and improve their lives. [critique - this can be all music; maybe struggle over contemporary reality, pop about what is good, what is meaningful]
 
Musicking (Christopher Small)- “to take part, in any capacity, in a musical performance, whether by performing, by listening, by rehearsing, or practicing, by providing material for performance (what is called composing), or by dancing. “
(adds “We might at times even extend its meaning to what the person is doing who takes the tickets at the door or the hefty men who shift the piano and the drums or the roadies who set up the instruments and carry out the sound checks or the cleaners who clean up after everyone else has gone. They, too, are all contributing to the nature of the event that is a musical performance.)(includes listening to recordings among performances) p. 9
 
Bi-musicality - learning a foreign music, becoming versed in its culture.
end
