

Kathak - major classical dance form of northern india. Means “the art of storytelling.” Usually portrays epic tales.
Kathakas - a community of artists whose hereditary profession is to narrate history while entertaining. Synonymous with the word kathak.
Mahabharata & Ramayana - Great scriptures of Sanskrit literature. The Kathakas told these stories through dance and music.
Ghunghur - A musical anklet tied to feet of indian classical dancers. Used to accentuate rhythmic aspects and allow complex footwork to be heard.
Rasas - A fundamental concept to many forms of indian art. It is the dominant emotional theme, or primary feeling evoked, by a work of art. 
Mudra - a symbolic or ritual gesture of the hands or fingers. In Indian classical dance, mudras are used heavily in the choreography. Mudras are double handed gestures.
Hastas - single handed mudra.
Tintal - one of the most famous talas of Hindustani music. 16- 4x4x4x4
Tatkar - the basic footwork of kathak dance. The feet beat out rhythms spoken in bols (ta, thei, tat).
Namaste/Namaskar - a respectful Hindu greeting. Used for both salutation and valediction. A slight bow with hands together pointed upwards close  to body
Pranam - a highly respectful greeting by putting the palms together. Directed towards those of higher status or respect, means “the divine within me greets the divine within you”
Bhakti - devotional worship directed at a supreme deity, by whose grace salvation may be attained. Practiced by majority of hindus, 
Bol - a spoken syllable used to define the tala, or rhythmic pattern. Part of hindustani music. 
Bollywood - name for the hindi language film industry based in Mumbai. One of the largest movie industries in the world in terms of films produced, employees, and tickets sold. 
Filmi - indian popular music written and performed for indian cinema. Makes up ¾ of music sales in india. Rather than being a backdrop to visuals, it is an integral part of the movies.



masala film - just as masala in indian cuisine is a mix of spices, a masala film is a mix of different genres. Typically these films freely mix action, comedy, romance, and drama or melodrama. Masala is the most popular genre of indian cinema. 
playback singer - a singer whose voice is pre-recorded for use in movies. In indian films, actors lip sync to a song sung by a playback singer. 
Mega city - a city with a total population of over 10 million. There are 35. Tokyo is an example of a megacity.
Asha Bhosle - a very famous playback singer. She has done over 100 movies, and performed abroad.
Lata Mangeshkar - Lata Mangeshkar is an Indian playback singer, and occasional music-composer. She is one of the best-known and most respected playback singers in India. Sister of asha bhosle.
Bhangra- A punjabi folk dance originally played at Harvest festivals. It has a distinctive exuberant and celebratory feel. It later took on a symbolic role in the Indian diaspora as a bridge between immigrants and their cultural heritage
Punjab-  Is a region in South Asia composed of parts of eastern Pakistan and northern India. It is one of the relatively richer regions in the area.  **MORE HERE?** (“breadbasket of India”)(Bhangra comes from here)
Jhummar - The folk form of Bhangra. The word means to sway. The swaying the of the music originally represented the gate of animals walking (consistent with Bhangra’s origin as a harvest festival)



Jhum/jhoom - unknown

start

Dhol - Dhol can refer to any one of a number of similar types of double-headed drum widely used, with regional variations, throughout the Indian subcontinent.
Bhangra Empire - Is an award winning San Francisco Bay Area dance (mostly Banghra) team of students and recent graduates. This group is emblematic of the Indian diaspora’s embrace of Bhangra as a positive cultural touchstone
Tango - a partner dance that originated in Argentina and Uruguay. There is a clear leader and follower, and most styles are danced in open embrace.
Compadrito- the male dancer in the tango. Translates directly to “the man that has come to less”
Bandoneon - a type of free reed aerophone popular in Argentina and Uruguay. It is an essential instrument to tango ensembles.
Habanera rhythm - a syncopated rhythm central to tango music.
La Comparasita - unknown
Astor Piazolla - an argentine tango composer, revelutionalized traditional tango into nueva tango
Gamelan - Literally translated it means “to hammer.” Gamelan is the ancient musical tradition of Java and Bali in Indonesia composed predominantly of percussive instruments. It was originally temple music and has religious meaning.
Bali Aga - indigenous people of Bali, predominantly located in the eastern part of the island. Live in isolated mountains, ocean is considered devil.
The Middle Period- lot of exchange b/w javenese and blinese culture. 16th century mass javenese migration to bali 
New period - characterized by dutch colonialism. nine balinese kingdoms became dutch communities
gamelan gong kebyar - Kebyar (literally “the process of flowering”) is a style of Baliense Gamelan music with explosive changes in tempo and dynamics. It is a 20 and 21st century phenomenon and is the most popular form of Gamelan in Bali
music kontemporer - 
Gangsa - The Gangsa is a type of percussive instrument consisting of tuned metal bars that is part of the Gamelan Orchestra. It is played one handed with a hammer by hitting the bars. The other hand can be used to quiet the vibrating metal slabs. There are several types of gangsa: the smaller higher pitched kantilan, the larger, lower pitched pemade and the largest ugal. The Ugal usually carries the central melody in Gamelan Gong Kebyar 
Panggul - A wooden hammer that is used to hit the metal bars of the Gangsa. The different sizes of the bars create a distinctive timbre.
Reyong - Is an instrument used in Gamelan music that consists of a long row of metal gongs suspended on a frame. It can be played by many players at once because of its large size.



Gong - A percussive instrument that consists of a flat metal disc that is suspended from a frame and hit with a hammer. The gong plays a special role in the Gamelan ensemble by creating a rhythmic cycle. Additionally the sound of the gong is thought to have spiritual powers and the ability to summon the gods.
Kempli - A percussive instrument that [is a small kettle] set over cords strung on a boxlike stand. [It is] mainly used as [a] tempo keeping [instrument] [Are these just smaller reyongs?] (It appears that this instrument is the instrument that the timekeeper plays, so technically a reyong has multiple miniature versions of this instrument)
Kendang - A two headed drum used in Gamelan music. It is also sometimes used to accompany Wayang performances.
Karwitan - Literally means to “play in a state of refinement.” Karawitan is a core principle of Gamelan music. [MORE HERE] (manicured)(clearly refined) refers to the playing of gamelan instruments, and comes from the word rawit, meaning 'intricate' or 'finely worked'. The word derives from the Javanese word of Sanskrit origin, rawit, which refers to the sense of smoothness and elegance idealized in Javanese music.
Ramé - The concept of buoyance and exuberance in that every aspect of something is filled up. This is a key principle of Gamelan performance. Everything from the music to the instruments and dancers is filled up with detail.  
Kotekan - The style of playing fast interlocking patterns and melodies that create one continuous melody. This is common in Gamelan music where different percussive instruments play different patterns that lock together.
paired tuning - The deliberate tuning of pairs of instruments slightly apart at every pitch. When played together this creates a vibrating sound. To the Western Ear this might sound out of tune but to the trained Balinese ear it sounds vibrant and full of life 
Ombek - instruments that are tuned at slight different pitches to produce an overall shimmering quality
Colotomy - a description of the rhythmic and metric patterns of gamelan music. It refers to the use of specific instruments to mark off nested time intervals, or the process of dividing rhythmic time into such nested cycles.
expressive use of tempo
Odalan - A Balinese Temple Anniversary ceremony performed every 210 days.  Gamelan music and performance was a key part of Bailense religious ceremonies.
wayan kulit - Indonesian shadow puppet theatre. Performances are often accompanied by a Gamelan orchestra
wayan klitik -  Are shadow puppet figures that are similar in size and construction from Wayan Kulit but are constructed from wood instead. These figures are generally more breakable. [WHY IS THIS IMPORTANT]
Dalang - Is the puppeteer in an Indonesian Wayang performance. He/She sits behind the screen and manipulates the puppets to create the show. 
Kecak - A form of Baliense dance also known as the monkey chant that was developed with westerners in the twentieth century with roots in traditional Balinese dances.  Over a hundred performers sit in a circle and percussively chant and move their arms in synchronization. 
Walter Spies -  A Russian born German painter that came to Java in the 1920’s. He depicted Balinese culture in his paintings and exemplified western perception of the Balinese as primitive and exotic. 
Colin McPhee - Colin McPhee was a Canadian composer and musicologist. He is primarily known for being the first Western composer to make an ethnomusicological study of Bali, and for the quality of that work.
Evan Ziporyn - Evan Ziporyn is an American composer of post-minimalist music with a cross-cultural orientation, drawing equally from classical music, avant-garde, various world music traditions, and jazz.



Pilgrimage - Journey to a place with a religious like devoution and faith. These can be explicitly religious (like the Haj) or can be cultural like journeys to Graceland
Fetishism -  Extreme obsession with objects that a person confers meaning onto. Fetishism is the attribution of inherent value or powers to an object.
Graceland - Graceland is Elvis Presley’s mansion and now his burial suite in Memphis Tennessee. Today it is a huge tourist attraction and a mythologized place for Elvis fans.
Deadheads/tourheads - Broadly speaking are groups built around common interest in a performer or band. These group often travel from performance to performance following the band around and creating their own culture and traditions.
Musical subcultures - The idea that people can, through music, form subcultures which are groups of people that are differentiated from the larger culture they belong to. For example the Deadheads are a musical subculture formed around the band the Grateful Dead.
Neo-colonialsm - A modern version of colonialism that comes at the hands of capitalism, global business and cultural imperialism rather than direct military and political control. The economic and cultural influence of the west can have colonial or colonial-like effects in the developing world. 
Full Moon party - an all-night beach party that originated in Haad Rin on the island of Ko Pha Ngan, Thailand on the night of, before or after every full moon. It is mostly attended by tourists.
Koh Samui- one of Thailand’s largest islands, known for palm-fringed beaches circling coconut groves and dense, mountainous rainforest. It’s also home to luxury resorts, posh spas and a rowdy nightlife scene that often attracts a backpacker crowd. 
Koh Phangan- Ko Pha Ngan is an island in southeast Thailand that’s renowned for its monthly
Timbuktu -  a city in the Mali, next to the River Niger on the southern edge of the Sahara Desert
Goa - state western india, Portuguese colony, many preserved churches and spice plantations. 
end
